---
anchor: GEN 1:5
title: One day
tags: translation
---

Most translations (including [ENGLXXUP](/about/texts-and-translations/#englxxup)) say "first day" rather than "one day," but "ἡμέρα μία" (*hēmera mia*) is better translated as the latter. "μία" (*mia*) is a cardinal number (meaning "one"), whereas "πρῶτος" (*prōtos*) would be the ordinal number (meaning "first"). For the other days of creation, the ordinal numbers are used, making this distinction intentional and important, and it is present in the Hebrew (יֹ֥ום אֶחָֽד / *yôm ʾeḥād*), Greek (ἡμέρα μία / *hēmera mia*), and even in the Latin Vulgate (*dies unus*). This distinction was the subject of several ancient Jewish (e.g., Philo, Rashi) and Christian (e.g., Sts. Basil and Augustine) commentaries.

> In those ancient and classical commentaries on this biblical text, moreover, we find the common assertion that the words "one day" served to elevate that day of Creation to something more than part of a sequence. There is a profound reason why the original day of Creation is appropriately called "one," whereas the second day is not appropriately called "two," nor the third day "three," and so forth. The original day is "one" in a manner analogous to the number itself. "One" is not simply the numeral that precedes two; it is, rather, the number out of which that second number comes. There is a formal disparity between one and the other numbers. One (*to hen*) is the font determining the identity of two and the subsequent numbers. "One" is not just "first" as part of a sequence; it is what we call a principle, an *arche*. On "day one," then, God creates light, which He thereby separates from darkness. It is out of this light, which is the product of God’s first creating word, that all the rest of Creation comes. All things that God makes are filled with His light. God's light lies shining at the heart of the world.[^reardon]

This theme of the "one day" was also associated with the eighth day (Sunday) and connected to the Orthodox liturgical calendar (specifically, Pentecost in the below example). St. Basil explained why the Church teaches to stand in prayer on Sunday:

> We say our prayers standing on the first day of the week, but not all know the reason why. By standing for prayer we remind ourselves of the grace given to us on the day of the resurrection, as if we are rising to stand with Christ and being bound to seek what is above. Not only this, it also seems somehow to be an image of the age to come. On account of this, although it is the beginning of days, Moses names it not "first" but "one." For it is written, "There was evening, and there was morning, one day" ([Gen 1:5](ref:GEN 1:5)), as if the same one often repeated. Now, "One" and "Eighth" are the same, which indicates of itself that the really "one" and true "eighth"&mdash;which the Psalmist mentions in some titles of psalms&mdash;are the state after this time, the unceasing, unending, perpetual day, that never-ending and ever-young age. Necessarily, then, the Church teaches her foster children to pray standing on this day, so that we would not neglect the provisions for our journey to everlasting life by a constant reminder of it. And the whole of Pentecost is a reminder of the resurrection to come in eternity, for that "one" and first day, multiplied by seven seven times, fills up the seven weeks of sacred Pentecost. It begins on the first day and ends on the same day, revolving fifty times through similar days in between. Eternity is like a circular movement, beginning from the same points where it ends. The ordinances of the Church well taught us to prefer to stand at prayer on this day, as if we were leading our minds from the present to the future. With each going down on the knee and rising up we indicate in deed that we have fallen through sin to the earth and are called up to heaven by the love of our creator.[^basil]


[^reardon]: Patrick Henry Reardon, *Creation and the Patriarchal Histories: Orthodox Christian Reflections on the Book of Genesis* (Chesterton, IN: Ancient Faith Publishing, 2008), 32–33.
[^basil]: St. Basil the Great, *On the Holy Spirit*, ed. John Behr, trans. Stephen Hildebrand, vol. 42, Popular Patristics Series (Yonkers, NY: St Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2011), 27.66: 106.
